Specifications
All the visualizations and information in this document are based on footprints generated
by STILT, a lagrangian atmospheric transport model, implemented as online tool at the ICOS
Carbon Portal. Output footprints are presented on a grid with 1/12×1/8 degrees cells (approximately
10km x 10km) where the cell values represent the cell area’s estimated surface influence
(“sensitivity”) in ppm / (μmol/ (m²s)) on the atmospheric tracer concentration at the station.
The footprints for a given station vary in time according to meteorological conditions. Combining
individual footprints with an anthropogenic emission inventory (EDGAR) and a biogenic
model (VPRM), which models the exchange of the tracer between the atmosphere and the natural
surface vegetation, results in estimates of the anthropogenic emissions contribution, and
the biogenic component, on the CO2 mole fraction at the station.
For all maps and the land cover polar graph, an average footprint for the specified date range
has been used. In the sensitivity area map the 192 000 cells have been aggregated depending
on their distance to, and direction of, the station. The same aggregation principles were used for
the population sensitivity map and point source contribution map, where the average
footprint cells were multiplied by underlying ancillary data layers. The population data are from
GEOSTAT (2011) and point source emissions data from E-PRTR (2017). The resulting values
in the population map are mainly interesting for intercomparisons between areas, whereas the
point source emissions were converted to estimated contribution to the CO2 mole fraction at
the station. The descriptions of the maps include what quartiles the station falls into in terms
of absolute ranking among selected ICOS atmospheric stations. The first quartile includes the
stations with the lowest total average values.
The land cover polar graphs are similar to the maps in that the centre represents the
location of the station and the direction bins have been used to aggregate data but do not represent
the distance of the land cover type to the station. Each land cover type of the CORINE
(2018) dataset is weighted by the average footprint. The legend shows the breakdown of the
influence area to the major land cover types, and the area of a land cover type in the figure
represents its presence in each direction of the station. The dominant land cover type is closest
to the centre, with the less significant land cover types displayed in descending order. The land
cover bar graph is a simpler way to visualize land cover type by direction. Eight 45 degrees
bins around the station are represented by stacked bars.
The seasonal variations table shows the average anthropogenic and biogenic contributions
during the different seasons of the year. The biogenic contributions include respiration
(CO2 input to the atmosphere) and Gross Ecosystem Exchange (GEE, CO2 uptake by the biosphere).
Individual footprints with associated estimates of CO2 concentration components from
respiration and GEE, as well as from anthropogenic emissions are displayed on the STILT result
visualization page. The values for sensitivity, point source contribution and population are
produced by summarizing the cells of maps where these layers have been multiplied by average
footprints for the different parts of the year. The seasonal values are shown relative to the yearly
averages. A positive relative difference of the seasonal GEE means more uptake of CO2, which
is usually true for the growing seasons.
The same type of values that are presented in the seasonal variations table but for the average
footprint of the selected data range are used in the extbfmultiple variable graph to place the
selected station relative to reference atmospheric stations in the ICOS network. The placement
on the y-axis is determined relative to the minimum and maximum variable values of these
stations and the selected station. 0% indicates the station with the lowest variable value, and
100% the highest.